---
layout: post
title: A programming journey for 2018
---

Hi there!

Every new year starts with a New Year's resolution. 
While most of these may contain all sorts of sports, I am planning to work on two software projects in two different programming languages.
You might ask why would I want to this? For me, there are multiple reasons:
1. Refresh my knowledge in a programming language I have used a lot but I am not using right now
2. Learn some new stuff from different domains (knowing ideas from different areas is often useful in scientific research)
3. Learn a new programming language and its underlying concepts (I love looking into programming languages I have never used before, because often learning other paradigms also improves your skills in programming languages you are already familiar with)

Other than that, I don't have any pressure to finish one of these projects by the end of the year (so why not) and I like to be able to switch between different projects (like mentioned before, often times you can benefit from stuff you've learned doing something different). In the remainder of this post, I will talk about the projects I am planning to do and why I've decided to use the programming languages and topics I have chosen.

## The programming languages I have chosen
Short answer: The languages I have chosen are __Java__ and __Rust__.

### But why?
Over the past 8 years or so I have looked into and used a plethora of programming languages using different programming paradigms like the functional (e.g. Haskell, F#), logic (Prolog) or imperative/oop (e.g. Java, C++, C#, Scala, ...) paradigm (actually most of the imperative/oop languages have turned into multi-paradigm languages also supporting some parts of functional programming, which is a very pleasant trend), as well as several dynamically typed scripting languages (e.g. Python or Julia). Doing this, I would come to the conclusion, that it is always enlightening to learn about new concepts, or old concepts used differently. There is (almost) always something new to learn that can be used in your everyday programming with any language. Additionally, knowing multiple programming languages helps to choose the right one for a specific task, making you a more flexible developer.

So, why Java and Rust? Java is probably the language I have used for the longest time, but not recently. At work I am currently using C++, C# (for simulating stuff with Unity3D) and mainly Python, which is very common to use in the machine learning community, because of libraries like tensorflow and sklearn. As I really liked Java, I want to refresh my knowledge a bit. Rust on the other hand is kind of the new kid on the block for low-level languages, but it seems to provide paradigms to grant high security for memory management and threading stuff, through the compiler yelling at you, when you don't think while coding. For me it seems like a valuable language to learn, even if it won't gain much popularity in the future (what I wouldn't expect), it forces you to think more about the code you are writing while you are writing it. Doesn't sound too bad of a habit to have when programming in other languages, right?

Now that I have chosen the programming languages I want to use, let's move on to the projects. 

## The Java project: A procedural 2X game
Take a 4X game (explore, expand, exploit, exterminate) and remove exploit and exterminate, then you have what I want to do (although I am still thinking about the exploit part). The goal is to build a rather simple rts-style game including exploration and civilization building. As I don't consider myself too good at visual art (I am more into music and stuff), I will try to create as much as possible (landscape, buildings, units, ...) using procedural generation techniques. To simplify this task, a low poly art style is envisaged.

### Why a 3D game?
First of all, I already know the basic concepts of 3D and game programming (I have had a view courses on OpenGL at university, and I have been using Unity3D for a while now) and I think it is a very complex domain with many interesting algorithms and techniques. Also, it gives much room for multicore, as well as gpu programming, what I am really looking forward to do once again. Next up, I just like games.

### Why Java?
You might ask: Why do you want to use Java instead of C++ for the 3D game thingy? In my opinion, Java is a great language for multicore programming and also I am aiming to perform the more heavy compations on the GPU through OpenGL Compute Shaders. From this perspective, the language doesn't really matter. Also, I don't think that for a game of this scope, the extra possibilities of manual memory management given in C++ is not necessary.

## The Rust project: A Wave 2 Tab converter
Are you a guitarist and have written a song at some time that you wanted to tab out? Then you probably know the struggle (at least that is something I feel to be cumbersome) of playing a part that you made up over and over to tab it correctly in your favorite tab program. For this case, I imagine a piece of software, that is capable of converting a raw guitar recording (without effects and stuff -> converter might function as a vst sitting right before the audio effects in the audio processing chain) directly into a tab. For this, I am intending to try some standard signal analysis (e.g. with fft's) and/or try different (simpler) machine learning techniques, like genetic algorithms or reinforcement learning.

### Why Rust?
I chose this project for learning Rust, as I imagine it to be a project that doesn't rely too much on 3rd party libraries (I guess there aren't too many yet for this rather young language). 

## The journey begins...
I will approach both of these projects in a learning by doing fashion, where I am learning about procedural generation and how to use [LWJGL](https://www.lwjgl.org/) with Java. In the case of Rust I am learning the language while implementing some simpler algorithms.

In a first step I will make up some higher level concepts for both projects, to organize the work to be done. At the same time, I will skim through some LWJGL tutorials and the [Rust book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/second-edition/).

I will try to post an update on my progress with these projects at least every few weeks. So stay tuned...

Cheers!

